*Hello everyone, before I begin I would like to thank Emmanuel for this introduction and thank you all for being here today. To briefly introduce myself, my name is Frédérique and I am a 3rd-year PhD student under the supervision of Michel Duprez, Emmanuel Franck and Vanessa Lleras. I am affiliated with the Inria Mimesis project team based in Strasbourg.*

1. 
    1. The objective of my thesis is the develop an hybrid method combining finite element methods and neural networks, for the numerical resolution of parametric PDEs. In fact, finite elements are accurate methods for which theoretical error estimators are already known, but they can be very costly. On the other hand, neural networks are fast and can be parametric. So the idea is to couple them with finite elements, here we will choose PINNs.
    2. The problem we will focus on for this talk is the Poisson problem with homogeneous Dirichlet boundary conditions on a spatial domain Omega. We will study this problem in a parametric way, meaning that the solution and the source term depend on a certain parameter $\mu$ living in the parametric space $\mathcal{M}$.

*Before getting into the hybrid approach, I will briefly present the two classical approaches that we are going to combine.*

2. Let us start with PINNs, for Physics-Informed Neural Networks. Concretely, what is a PINN? It is a standard neural network (dense network for example) that takes $x$ and $\mu$ as input. Why do we say "physics-informed"? It is because training does not require data but uses the physics of the equation. Concretely, we seek to solve the following minimization problem with two loss terms: a first one on the residual of the equation integrated over the spatial domain and the parametric domain, and a second one on the Dirichlet condition integrated over the boundary and over the parametric domain. In practice, what we do is use a Monte-Carlo method to discretize these losses by sampling points in our spatial and parametric domains (called collocation points) with the goal of finding the best possible $u_\theta$.

3. 
    1. The second approach I mentioned in the introduction is finite element methods. I think most of you are familiar with these methods, but I’ll briefly go over them anyway to introduce the goal. So, the principle of these approaches is to rewrite the problem in another form, called the variational problem. We then build a mesh of our geometry (of size $h$), here Cartesian, on which we define a continuous, piecewise polynomial space (of degree $k$). We then seek to determine a polynomial approximation $u_h$ of the solution $u$ of the PDE, in the space we just built.
    2. In practice, to find $u_h$, we simply solve a linear system with $A$ a square matrix of a certain size $N_\text{dofs}$. This matrix therefore depends on what we call the degrees of freedom of the space, which are points associated with the mesh cells and whose number also depends on the chosen polynomial degree $k$.
    3. More precisely, the more we increase the polynomial degree $k$ and the more we refine the mesh (meaning we decrease the characteristic size $h$), the more accurate the solution becomes but also the larger $N_\text{dofs}$ required. In summary, if we want an accurate solution, we have a large $N_\text{dofs}$ and therefore a large linear system to solve, which is costly and this is the part we are going to try to improve.

*Now that I have briefly introduced PINNs and finite element methods, we can see how finite element can be used to improve the network's prediction.*

4. 
    1. To resolve these numerical cost issues, we developed the method defined as follows. We have the OFFLINE part of the pipeline, which simply consists of training a parametric PINN. For this, we take as input a set of points in our spatial domain $\Omega$ and a set of parameters in a parametric domain $\mathcal{M}$, and the PINN predicts the solution of the PDE denoted $u_\theta$.
    2. For the ONLINE part, we always consider a set of points on $\Omega$, but a single fixed parameter for which we obtain the PINN prediction, then we apply what we will call an enriched finite element method, supposed to correct and certify the PINN prediction. What we hope is that the whole ONLINE process is accurate thanks to FE and fast thanks to the PINN.

5. So more precisely in this new approach, we are going to consider what I call here a space enriched additively by the network. We still looking for a polynomial approximation of u, but this time in the form of something plus the PINN prediction. The unknown of the variational problem then becomes this something, denoted $C_h^+$, and the boundary conditions are then modified as follows. In other words, we seek to approximate via FE the difference between the prediction $u_\theta$ and the solution $u$. And thus we hope that this modified problem will give us the same results as standard FE but on coarser meshes, which allows to reduce the numerical cost.

6. As I mentioned earlier, error estimators in finite element methods are already known, which will be the main point of this hybrid approach. So here we place ourselves in a slightly more general setting than Poisson with an elliptic problem, and a classical result in FE is the following. Concretely, we can bound the errors in $L^2$ norm for a fixed mesh size $h$ and a chosen polynomial order $k$, as follows. We have shown that our additive approach has the same convergence order as standard FE, with a gain constant that depends entirely on the quality of the considered prior, in particular on its $(k+1)$-th order derivatives. Concretely if this constant is smaller than $1$, these means if the quality of the prior's derivatives is good, we gain in accuracy compared to standard FE.

*Let us now move on to the numerical results.*

7. Let us start with the simplest possible problem, the 2D Poisson problem with Dirichlet conditions on a square. For this test case, we choose an analytical solution $u$ and 2 parameters in $\mathcal{M}$ and we train a parametric PINN as explained previously...
8.  
    1. To begin with, we will consider a fixed parameter and focus only on the ONLINE phase. First, we will verify the error estimators presented previously by comparing the L2 errors of standard FE and our additive approach. For this, we vary the mesh size $h$ and the polynomial order $k$, taking values $1$, $2$ and $3$. We can see that both methods, standard FE in green and the additive approach in orange, satisfy the expected convergence orders. Moreover, our enriched approach seems more accurate than standard FE. Indeed, for a polynomial degree of $1$, it seems to give the same results in terms of error as standard FE for order $2$.
    2. Now let us say we want to reach a fixed error $e$. We can ask what is the number of degrees of freedom each approach needs to reach this same fixed error. Say that for $k=1$, we want to reach an error $e$ of $1e-3$, standard FE requires a square matrix of size $14000$ by $14000$, while our approach requires a matrix of size $64$ by $64$.
9.  Let us now extend the problem to 3D. We will consider exactly the same problem but on a cube considering $3$ parameters and we train a PINN in the same way as before. To give an idea of the scale, on my laptop the OFFLINE cost, i.e. the PINN training, is about 12 minutes.
10. 
    1.  As for the 2D case, we can start with a purely ONLINE study by first looking at error estimates for a fixed parameter, this time only for degree $k=1$. We can see that both methods satisfy the expected convergence orders and that our additive approach is more accurate than standard FE.
    2.  What may interest us now is the execution times of the different approaches, still only online, i.e. excluding the training time. What we see here is the relative L2 error obtained as a function of execution time, where in both cases we count the mesh construction, the matrix assembly and the resolution. For our enriched approach, we also add the evaluation time of the network's derivatives.
    3.  So as before, we can try to fix an error $e$ and this time we will look at the number of dofs and the execution time needed to reach this error.
11. 
    1.  Considering $\mathbb{P}^1$ elements, we denote by $N$ the number of nodes per direction, so the total number of degrees of freedom is $N^3$. Say we want to reach an error $e$ of $1e-3$, standard FE requires a mesh with $N=152$ nodes per direction, while our additive approach requires a mesh of $N=12$ nodes. In terms of ONLINE execution time, standard FE requires 76 seconds versus 0.05 for the enriched approach.
    2.  However, as I said before, the OFFLINE time which is the PINN training, must be taken into account.
12. Therefore, we will place ourselves in another framework, this time parametric. In other words, say we want to solve $n_p$ different Poisson problems, these means for $n_p$ different parameter instances, after how many $n_p$ does the complete pipeline of the additive approach, including the training cost, become advantageous. Say we always want to reach an error $e$ of $1e-3$, the OFFLINE cost of standard FE simply consists of building the Cartesian mesh of $152^3$, while that of our approach includes the network training as well as building a coarser mesh of $12^3$. These OFFLINE times are the boxed values, in green for standard FE and in orange for the additive approach. Now what we see on the x-axis is the number of parameter instances $n_p$. For each resolution of a Poisson problem, we add the ONLINE cost, including assembly and solve, and for the additive approach the evaluation cost of the network's derivatives. What we want to show here is that for $n_p=19$ resolutions of the Poisson problem, the complete pipeline of the additive approach becomes more advantageous than standard FE. To reach an error $e$ of $5e-4$, we see that we need even less parameter instances $n_p=5$ for the additive approach to become more advantageous than standard FE. This is due to the fact that to reach a smaller error, standard FE requires a finer mesh and therefore needs a larger ONLINE cost. Maybe just one last remark, on the graphs it looks like the additive approach is constant — that is not the case, it is just that the ONLINE cost is much smaller than that of standard FE.
13. Ok now I would like to briefly show numerical results on slightly more complex problems. In this test case we go back to 2D on a square where we will consider this time an anisotropic elliptic problem with Dirichlet conditions. We are still on a parametric problem where we consider 4 parameters in the domain $\mathcal{M}$ as well as the source term and the diffusion matrix defined as follows. We train a PINN again.
14. 
    1.  We can reproduce the same curves as before for a fixed parameter and we see the correct convergence orders for both approaches and a gain in terms of error for the additive approach.
    2.  To get a better idea of the gain of this enriched approach, we can then consider a set of parameters and look at the average gain, these means the ratio between the error of standard FE and that of the additive approach. We can see that for a polynomial degree $k=1$ for a mesh with $N=20$, we have an average gain of about $35$ which is rather interesting. We also see that the higher the polynomial degree $k$, the lower the average gain. This is due to the fact that the gain depends on the quality of the prior's derivatives, and the higher the polynomial degree $k$, the higher-order derivatives are needed to achieve an interesting gain.
15. This is just what one of the solutions obtained by the additive approach looks like for a fixed parameter (for $k=2$ and $N=16$). At the top right, what we see is the solution of the enriched problem, i.e. the network correction polynomially approximated by FE. In particular, we can compare the error maps between the two approaches and we see that the additive error looks slightly more diffuse.
16. I would like to briefly present one last test case where this time we go back to Poisson but on a annulus and with mixed boundary conditions.
17. By performing the same studies as before, we can draw the same conclusions and we have an average gain of $55$ for $\mathbb{P}^1$ elements.
18. Here again, a plot of the solutions obtained for a fixed parameter.
19. In conclusion, we have presented a new hybrid approach combining finite element methods and PINNs for solving parametric PDEs in an ONLINE/OFFLINE context. In the numerical results, we were able to show that in a parametric setting, the additive approach is fast and accurate. We were also able to validate the theoretical results by showing that using the prior can improve the FE error. If you are interested in this approach, feel free to scan the QR code here.
We have also extended this to nonlinear problems, in particular with Navier-Stokes, where we have some promising results.
Currently, we are working on extensions of these approaches in particular with hybrid methods combining neural networks and DG approaches as well as non-conforming FE.

If you are interested in this work, feel free to scan the QR code on the left as well. You will access the ScimBa library developed in Strasbourg, which is a SciML library developed in JAX.
